## TAGE

### Publication:
J. Huck, D. Morris, J. Ross, A. Knies, H. Mulder and R. Zahir, "Introducing the IA-64 architecture," in IEEE Micro, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 12-23, Sept.-Oct. 2000, doi: 10.1109/40.877947.

### Summary:

The IA-64 architecture was developed by Intel and HP, back in 2000, to advance computing to the 64-bit paradigm, by exploiting instruction-level parallelism (ILP). Its primary objective was to maximize parallel execution through a flexible and expandable instruction set. 

**Key Features**: 

- **Hardware**: large register files, including 128 general-purpose and floating-point registers
- **ISA**: 128-bit format to accommodate three parallel instructions with room for compiler hints, predication and future expansion
- **Compiler**: optimizations for control and data speculation, predicated execution to utilize the whole design
- **Software**: speculative loads, deferred exception handling, and register rotation for efficient parallelism

### Takeaways:

The architecture strikes a novel balance between the compiler and hardware tasks, enabling efficient code reorganization during compilation and optimal resource allocation at runtime. The use of control and data speculation while deferring exceptions is a good strategy to optimize execution and minimize pipeline stalls. 

This research has incorporated all the parallelization features in a single-roof but relies on a key assumption that enough resources are always available for executing both sides of a branch in case of divergent programs. If such resources are available, then it contradicts its claims for parallel execution with maximum utilization. Parallel execution should ideally mean executing sequential instructions concurrently, rather than executing both conditions of a branch and discarding the incorrect one.

### Augmentation:

Although theoretically robust, the IA-64 architecture lacks demonstration through real-world applications in the paper. Benchmarking IA-64 against contemporary designs in its era would provide valuable insights into its practical impacts.

IA-64 was a completely new architecture with no backward compatibility, making its adoption difficult for existing users and systems. In contrast, AMD's x86-64 architecture seamlessly extended the 32-bit architecture to 64-bit capabilities, enabling smoother transitions for users and systems. This fundamental difference of backward compatibility shaped the computing landscape, leading to Intel discontinuing IA-64 support in 2023, while AMD's x86-64 continues to dominate the market.
